>> Is the universe an
interconnected neural network,
a new way of thinking about
how different areas of physics
and the universe
could be connected?
This is Gaia News.
[THEME MUSIC]
For years, physicists have
tried to unify classical physics
and quantum physics.
Classical physics goes back to
the time of Sir Isaac Newton.
It's based on mechanical,
physical equations
that everything operates
like clockwork--
predictable and knowable.
Quantum physics looks at the
microscopic subatomic levels
and how particles, waves,
and force fields interact.
But the more fundamental laws
of physics at this quantum level
are the antithesis of how they
behave at a classical level.
Instead of certainty,
you have uncertainty.
So how do we connect
these different views
and the so-called
theory of everything?
In a recent paper by University
of Minnesota-Duluth physics
professor Vitaly
Vanchurin, he argues
this can exist if
the universe is
connected in a neural network.
Dr. Theresa Bullard, physicist
and host of Gaia's "Mystery
Teachings," explains.
>> This paper about the universe
could be a neural network is,
I would say, a model at the
moment of trying to figure out
how can we merge
classical physics,
like general relativity,
with quantum physics.
And the idea that
he's coming up with
is to use a similar
method that scientists
are using to model how
the human brain works.
And they use this
process that they
call neural networks
to create, for example,
the programming language
for artificial intelligence.
So he's using the same
model, the same idea,
to say, well, can we model the
universe, the entire universe,
and how it operates off of
the same concept or the same--
it's a mental
framework, basically.
>> This paper can't yet prove
that the universe is a neural
network.
But what did we learn?
>> It does bring up
some interesting ideas.
The idea, for example,
a neural network.
If we think about
the human brain,
the neural networks
are very connected.
There's always this
information that's
being exchanged from
one neuron to another
across those synaptic gaps.
and the whole of the human
brain is very interconnected.
So if we're applying that
model to the universe,
it's kind of like saying,
well, could the whole universe
be very interconnected, not
just physically but also
in how the laws
of physics operate
from the macro scale
to the micro scale
and even to the subatomic scale?
Is there some kind
of interconnection?
of structure or order
to how those laws
of physics work
and how they take
energy and information
and what they do with it?
>> How does this way of thinking
affect our way of looking
at the universe and the
theory of everything?
>> From the people
who are proposing it,
I think that they like the
idea of the interconnectedness.
But I think that they're
coming from a purely
physical and mathematical
and computational approach.
I feel that until scientists
also start looking at, well,
what about consciousness, not
from a epiphenomenon of neurons
in the brain but consciousness
as a fundamental essence
within the universe,
consciousness as primary
and also non-physical
things such as spirit.
It's like we need to
bring that non-physical,
that consciousness, that spirit
into the equations somehow
or at least into an
understanding of how,
when they find their
physical model--
their theory of everything
at a physical level--
how does that interact
with consciousness.
>> What does this neural
network theory show,
and what is it missing?
>> The verdict is still out.
It's still too early in the game
to know whether this is going
to gain any traction or not.
And either way, it's
still just a mental model.
It's still a model of how we
just take information, put it
into some kind of
simulation, and then get
information out that gives
us the equations that we know
of that govern our universe.
It's still not showing us
the fundamental essence
of why is it that way, what
governs that structure.
And that fundamental
essence, that's
what's beyond that
neural network.
What's behind that
structure, that's
what we really need to be asking
the bigger questions about.
>> What is behind
that structure?
>> I think there's intelligence
behind that structure.
I think that there's the mind of
the spirit, the oneness of all.
The purpose defines
the structure.
It gives it its definition.
And then there's
a reason for it.
It's not just a random thing.
And that purpose
fundamentally relates to us.
Who are we as spirit
beings, as eternal beings,
as consciousness here having
a physical experience?
But this physical
experience is an experience.
It's not necessarily who we are.
So somehow I believe that
we are at the core of why
this universe works
the way it does.
>> Right now this neural network
idea is an interesting theory--
a thought exercise of how
the universe is connected
and a possible way to reconcile
quantum and classical physics.
But what about the
spiritual element?
At its most
fundamental definition,
physics deals with matter,
energy, motion, and force,
and communicates with
the language of math.
But are modern
physicists missing
the spiritual
conscious connection
in the universe and beyond?
Could this be the key to the
mysteries of the universe?
For new perspective,
this is Gaia News.